In this lecture, you're going to learn about static routing.
You saw in the last lecture that when you add an IP address to a router's interface, it automatically
adds a connected route to its routing table and it's able to route traffic between its different connected
interfaces.
But if a router wants to send traffic to a subnet that it's not directly connected to, then it's
going to need some way to know how to get there.
So you need to get that route into the routing table.
You can either do it manually as an administrator by adding a static route, or the router can learn it
dynamically through a routing protocol. In this lecture,
we're going to cover how to add it with a static route.
You see the example here down at the bottom,
I've got R1 is directly connected to the 10.0.0.0/24, 10.0.1.0.0/24 and
10.02.0/24 networks. So, it can route traffic directly there just by configuring the IP addresses.
But there's another network of 10.1.0.0/24, which is behind the router, R2.
So right now, R1 doesn't know how to get there.
I'm going to need to add a route to tell it how to get there. And R2 is directly connected to
10.1.0.0/24 and 10.0.0.0/24, so it can send traffic to them directly as soon as I've configured
the IP addresses.
It's going to need routes to 10.0.1.0/24 and 10.0.2.0/24 behind router R1.
So the command to add a static route is 'ip route'.
Let's look at R1's route to get to the 10.1.0.0 network first.
The command that I need to add is 'ip route 10.1.0.0 255.255.255.0',
so the subnet I need to get to including its subnet mask.
Then, I say the next hop IP address that I need to send traffic to
in order to get there.
So for R1, to send traffic to the 10.1.0.0 network, it needs to send it out of its fastEthernet0/0
interface and send it to 10.0.0.2 on router R2, so I add the route for
that. And it should be obvious how I do the routes on R2 now it's going to need two routes, a route
to 10.1.0.0 and a route to 10.0.0.2.
So the commands are 'ip route
10.0.1.0 255.255.255.0' going in the next hop 10.0.0.1 on R1. And 'ip route
10.0.2.0 255.255.255.0',
the next hop is the same again,
it's still the 10.0.0.1 interface on router R1.
Once you've done that, you'll be able to route traffic between all of the networks in the network there.
Okay, let's take it up a notch and add another router.
So it's the same topology as before, but I've added an additional router, which is R3. So R3 has got
routes to 10.1.1.1 and the 10.1.0.0 1 network because it's directly connected to them.
But right now, it doesn't know how to get to the network 10.0.0.0/24 behind R2, and 10.0.1.0/24 and 10.0.2.0/24,
which are behind R1.
So I'm going to need to add routes to those networks.
So first up, the route to get 10.0.0.0 behind R2.
The command would be 'ip route 10.0.0.0 255.255.255.0',
and the next hop is 10.1.0.2, which is on router R2. Then the commands to get to the routes
behind router R1 would be 'ip route 10.0.1.0 255.255.255.0'
and the next hop address is 10.1.0.2.
Okay, so those routes are behind R1, but I don't point the route at R1 because R3 is not directly
connected to it.
When I add the target for the route, it has to be reachable on a directly connected interface. So R3,
to get to R1,
it sends a traffic via R2 which it is directly connected to. So the target for the ip route.
10.0.1.0 is 10.1.0.2 the same address again on R2. And to get to 10.0.2.0,
it's going to be the same again, 'ip route 10.0.2.0 255.255.255.0' next hop is again
10.1.0.2 on R2. The route on R2,
it needs a route to get to 10.1.1.1 behind R2.
So the commands is 'ip route 10.1.1.0 255.255.255.0' and the next hop is 10.1.0.1,
that is out
the interface that is directly connected to R3. And then to get to the two routes behind R1, I've got IP route
for 10.0.1.0 and 10.0.2.0, they're both a /24, so 255.255.255.0,
and the next hop for both of them is the directly reachable link to R1 which is 10.0.0.1
And finally, we need to do routes on R1 to get to 10.1.1.0 and 10.1.0.0,
they are both reachable via R2 at 10.0.0.2. Once we've configured all of these routes,
we're going to have reachability between all of the different subnets on our network there.
Next up we'll do the usual,
we're going to configure this in the lab. I'll see you in the next lecture for that.